This video contains the exercise that follows up on the previous video on identifying critical points
in functions.
So what you want to do in this exercise is implement this function.
You can see it's a function of two variables although we're only going to be considering one value of
a at a time.
So X squared times e to the minus A times X squared.
So for different values of a ranging from 0 to 2 in steps of point 2 5.
So a equals zero or point two five or point five or point seventy five.
And so on.
Up to 2 which values of a give this function a critical value at either x equals 1 or X equals 2.
That is your job to figure this out.
So what you have to do is implement this function loop through different values of A and then figure
out which values of a give this function with this value of a a critical point either at X equals 1
or X equals 2.
And then what you want to do is print that out in nice looking latex format and also show plots of the
function and the derivative of the function.
So upon successful completion of this exercise you should produce a screen that looks something like
this so you can go through and see for each value of A.
Here you're going to get either no critical points or a critical point at X equals one or X equals 2.
Now you can see I got a little I was a little disappointed when there wasn't a critical point and maybe
a little too enthusiastic but I get really excited about critical points.
Here you see the function.
So these are the functions for different values of a and these are the derivatives of these functions.
Again for different values of a.
All right.
So good luck.
Pause the video get going in Python.
And now I am gonna switch to Python and explain how I solved this problem so I solved this by using
simple module for representing the function and for computing the critical points and then I converted
those simple expressions into functions using num PI that I can then use for graphing and then of course
to do the graphing we need the manpower lib and for the latex display I need the display and math functions.
So let's get started by creating our function.
So I say a and X. These are the two symbolic variables that we need a and x and then we need our function.
And I'm going to call this base X spur for base expression.
So that was X squared times e to the minus a times X squared.
So that's the basic expression.
And then of course I'm going to substitute different values of A and in particular the a range that's
going to be num pie and I'm gonna set this up as also using the NUM pi function a range.
And this is going to go from 0 to 2 in steps of point 2 5.
Let me just quickly show you what this variable will look like.
So it's zero point to five point five.
And so on up to that actually has to go up to two point two five.
Because the upper bounds here is exclusive.
So it's good thing I checked.
Okay.
And then we want the X range and the X range is going to be used for plotting when I convert from a
simple expression into a function that can be evaluated for discrete points.
So let's see.
Lynn space I'm going to make this go from minus three to plus three in how about one hundred steps.
Okay.
And then I want to set up the figure.
So I'm going to use this formulation.
So fig comma X equals POTUS subplots.
And now we want a one by two geometry of subplots.
So we have one row and two columns and the first column is gonna correspond to the function itself.
And the second column will correspond to the derivative of the function.
All right.
So I believe we have everything set up here.
My plan now my strategy is going to be to loop through all these different values of a replace a in
this expression with these numbers and then compute the derivative and then test whether the derivative
is equal to zero at either x equals 1 or X equals 2.
All right let's get started.
So I will call this looping index a I in a range.
So let's see so now I'm going to say that this variable F X for function of x is the base expression
substituting a for a I.
And then we need the derivative and that's simply assume that def of F X and then we need the critical
points.
Critical points equals and solve.
Of D F X I meant to make this X like this.
So you see what I'm doing.
I'm generating a new function of only one variable variable X replacing a with these numbers here and
then I take the derivative and then I solve for the derivative which means implicitly I'm setting the
derivative equal to zero and identifying the critical points okay.
And then you know I'm just going to print out these crit points here and just run this code and mostly
you know I don't really care so much about what numbers these are outputting I just want to make sure
that I haven't made any errors yet.
Okay but we can already see there's gonna be a two here and a one here.
So that's pretty good.
All right.
So the next thing I want to do is generate a plot.
So do some plotting.
So now in this left plot over here which is the first subplot.
So that's x 0.
I'm going to plot now what do we want to plot.
Well it's going to be the X range and then we can't really just plot f x.
We need to convert this into a function that can be evaluated.
And so that's done with Sim that Lam defined effects and then actually the first input has to be the
variable and then it's the expression or the function and then I'm going to immediately evaluate this
function at the X points that I specified here and X range.
Okay so then I'm going to actually while I'm gonna copy and paste this for the derivative but it's probably
a good idea to run this first and make sure it works.
Okay so that looks good.
Now I feel comfortable copying and pasting this so we change this to be index 1 which is gonna be the
second index here and then this basically just has to become VFX looking good except that both of these
plots show most of the y axis range in uninteresting parts of the functions.
So I'm gonna actually work on this plot just a little bit more and then I'm gonna get back to testing
for critical points equaling 0 1 or 2.
So let's see.
I'm going to specify that the left plot should have a Y limit of how about 0 2 2.
That's probably a good range 0 to 2.
Let's see.
All right.
This looks better.
And then for the second axis.
Let's see so zero to 2 is not a good range here.
Maybe minus two to plus two.
Let's try that
all right.
So this is looking good.
I want to add a title here.
So let's say x 0 dot set title and I'll just call this function and then here I will say X one dot sets
title and it's two Riv.
Tive.
Oh right.
So this is starting to look pretty good.
There's a couple more things I want to add to this.
But we can get back to that later.
What I would like to do now is run the test.
So I would like to test for the derivative.
Sorry the cryptic critical points.
Now how should we do this.
Actually let's.
Let's print this out again.
Great points.
So then we can talk about this as we're going through.
So at each iteration through this loop we have either one or three elements in this list.
And so we want to do is test whether the number one or the number two is present in this list.
And the keyword here is in we're going to use a special python function called in that's going to tell
us whether an element is in some list and actually I don't believe I've introduced you to this function
yet in this course.
So let me take a moment here to explain how this works.
So let's say 1 in and now I'm going to have a list of two three four.
So now the answer is false.
We get a boolean result because of course one is not in this list but if I would add one to this list
then we get true.
OK.
So I think that's pretty straightforward to use this function in.
So let's see.
I'm going to write if 1 in crit points then we want to display math and then I like to have this big
right arrow here.
And then what do we want to say it has to say the function.
So I'll say percent S has a critical point at X equals 1.
And then you know I was.
Well who.
Okay that sounds pretty exciting.
And then we need to replace the percent s over here with later OK.
And then the function f x okay.
So let's already run this and we should get at least one answer.
Okay.
So this says X squared times e to the minus X squared has a critical point at x 1.
So what is going wrong here.
Well you might remember that whenever you're writing text in later latex you need to specifically tell
latex that it's going to be text.
I'm going to encase all of this in text.
Otherwise the latex decoder is going to interpret all these spaces or basically just ignore all of these
spaces and treat each one of these individual letters as if they are mathematical variables.
All right.
So let's try that again.
OK.
So this is looking good and you can see that the rest of this test is going to be basically the same.
So l f 2 in crit points and then you can really just literally copy and paste this and we just have
to change x equals two.
Now if you like you could actually also set this up in a for loop to loop over 1 and 2.
But you know sometimes you have to make a decision about whether it's worth having a for loop just for
two elements just for two tests like this.
All right.
So if neither of these is true and actually let's run this already.
Okay.
So we do get two answers here.
One with a critical point at x equals two.
One with a critical point of X equals one.
And now the final thing a final piece of text to add is what to do when neither of these is the case.
Well then we are very sad and I'm going to have a little bit of space here and then it's gonna say has
no critical points at X equals one or x equals two.
And then we get a sad face here.
You know I don't really know why I'm so sad about this.
There's nothing wrong with having no critical points at x 1 or x 2 also because all these functions
actually have critical points all over the place just not at X equals one or x equals two.
Okay.
So there's one more thing that I would like to add which is a vertical dotted line or dashed line on
these graphs showing the critical points or the desired critical points of X equals one an x equals
two.
So let's see.
That's going to be a x 0 dot plot and now we want on the x axis.
It goes from 1 to 1 which means it doesn't move at all in the axis.
And on the y axis it goes from zero to 2 because that's already what I said the y axis limits to be
and this should be a dashed line.
And I'm going to set the color to be gray.
Okay.
So there you see this line here.
And then I went another one at the other critical point of two and then I will copy and paste both of
these and put it in the derivative plot as well Whoops.
That should be yet again a lesson here that when you are copying and pasting code you have to be super
careful to look through all of the code and make sure that you don't need to adapt anything when it's
being pasted and actually hear the use.
Okay so I was really sloppy when I was copying and pasting this.
Let's see.
I hope this is now correct.
All right.
This looks good.
So this just shows you the critical points of 1 and 2 and it's interesting to see which functions have
the critical values here.
So it looks like it's this purple line.
You can see the big bend in the function it changes its mind and starts going the other way at exactly
x equals 1.
These other functions here they have their critical points less than 1.
Here are the critical points are greater than 1.
Here the critical point is exactly 2.
And it's a little bit harder to see here but essentially you're looking for this line going through
zero and you see that all of these functions go through zero.
But it's only the Orange Line and the Purple Line that cross zero at exactly x equals 1.
And exactly x equals 2.
Very nice.
I hope you enjoyed this and the previous video on critical points of a function in the next video we're
going to continue working our way through calculus with partial derivatives.
See you soon.